README.md, before:

# fastify-discord-app-demo

This repository is a growing tutorial to build an application with Fastify!
It will target Discord just for fun and to add some not-so-useful features.

Every upgrade will be documented and posted on [dev.to](https://dev.to/eomm) and now on the new [backend.cafe/](https://backend.cafe/) site!
Here you will find the source code and the commit history!

To see the last version of the application, it is published at [https://fastify-discord-app-demo.herokuapp.com/](https://fastify-discord-app-demo.herokuapp.com/) 

## Posts

1. [A Discord app with Fastify!](https://dev.to/eomm/a-discord-app-with-fastify-3h8c) - [📝](./posts/01-init-application.md)
1. [Project Automation](https://dev.to/eomm/project-automation-2bee) - [📝](./posts/02-project-automation.md)
1. [To Production](https://dev.to/eomm/fastify-demo-goes-to-production-499c) - [📝](./posts/03-to-production.md)
1. [BONUS: Grokking Fastify Error handlers](https://dev.to/eomm/fastify-error-handlers-53ol) - [📝](./posts/bonus-error-handler.md)
1. [BONUS: Why should I prefer Fastify to Expressjs?](https://dev.to/eomm/why-should-i-prefer-fastify-to-expressjs-44c4) - [📝](./posts/bonus-why-fastify.md)
1. [BONUS: Fastify Multipart File Management](https://backend.cafe/fastify-multipart-upload) - [📝](./posts/bonus-multipart-breakdown.md)
1. [BONUS: Fastify and mongodb](https://backend.cafe/how-to-use-fastify-and-mongodb) - [📝](./posts/bonus-mongodb.md)
1. COMING SOON!

## Contributing

For any suggestion or concern feel free to open a new issue.
For grammar _horrors_ a PR would be really appreciated!

Commit message:

add mongodb testing article (#15)
* add mongodb testing article

* multi file notes

* add published link

README.md, after:

# fastify-discord-app-demo

This repository is a growing tutorial to build an application with Fastify!
It will target Discord just for fun and to add some not-so-useful features.

Every upgrade will be documented and posted on [dev.to](https://dev.to/eomm) and now on the new [backend.cafe/](https://backend.cafe/) site!
Here you will find the source code and the commit history!

To see the last version of the application, it is published at [https://fastify-discord-app-demo.herokuapp.com/](https://fastify-discord-app-demo.herokuapp.com/) 

## Posts

1. [A Discord app with Fastify!](https://dev.to/eomm/a-discord-app-with-fastify-3h8c) - [📝](./posts/01-init-application.md)
1. [Project Automation](https://dev.to/eomm/project-automation-2bee) - [📝](./posts/02-project-automation.md)
1. [To Production](https://dev.to/eomm/fastify-demo-goes-to-production-499c) - [📝](./posts/03-to-production.md)
1. [BONUS: Grokking Fastify Error handlers](https://dev.to/eomm/fastify-error-handlers-53ol) - [📝](./posts/bonus-error-handler.md)
1. [BONUS: Why should I prefer Fastify to Expressjs?](https://dev.to/eomm/why-should-i-prefer-fastify-to-expressjs-44c4) - [📝](./posts/bonus-why-fastify.md)
1. [BONUS: Fastify Multipart File Management](https://backend.cafe/fastify-multipart-upload) - [📝](./posts/bonus-multipart-breakdown.md)
1. [BONUS: How to use Fastify and MongoDB](https://backend.cafe/how-to-use-fastify-and-mongodb) - [📝](./posts/bonus-mongodb.md)
1. [BONUS: How to test a Fastify application](https://backend.cafe/how-to-test-a-fastify-application) - [📝](./posts/bonus-mongodb-test.md)
1. COMING SOON!

## Contributing

For any suggestion or concern feel free to open a new issue.
For grammar _horrors_ a PR would be really appreciated!
